# New features

- Export biochemical properties of gene regions with `-biochemicalProperty <geneFeature> <property>`
  or `-baseBiochemicalProperties <geneFeature>` export options. Available in export for alignments, clones and SHM tree
  nodes. Available properties: Hydropathy, Charge, Polarity, Volume, Strength, MjEnergy, Kf1, Kf2, Kf3, Kf4, Kf5, Kf6,
  Kf7, Kf8, Kf9, Kf10, Rim, Surface, Turn, Alpha, Beta, Core, Disorder, N2Strength, N2Hydrophobicity, N2Volume,
  N2Surface.
- Export isotype with `-isotype [<(primary|subclass|auto)>]`
- Added `isotype` field to `exportClones` as default for presets that support isotype identification.
- Export `-mutationRate [<gene_feature>]` in `exportShmTreesWithNodes`, `exportClones` and `exportCloneGroups` command:
  number of mutations from germline divided by target sequence size. For `exportClones` and `exportCloneGroups` CDR3 is
  not included in calculation.
- Support `cram` files as input for `analyze` and `align` commands. Optionally a reference to the genome can be
  specified by `--reference-for-cram`

# Algorithm enhancement

- Global consensus assembly algorithm used in `assemble` to collapse UMI/Cell groups into contigs now have better seed
  selection empiric for multi-consensus assembly scenarios. This increases sensitivity during assembly of secondary
  consensuses from the same group of sequences.
- Consensus assembly parameters `maxNormalizedAlignmentPenalty` and `altSeedPenaltyTolerance` are adjusted to increase
  sensitivity.

# Minor fixes

- Corrected the help message that appears when using a deprecated preset and incorrectly suggests
  using `--assemble-contigs-by` instead of `--assemble-clonotypes-by`.
- The `--split-by-sample` option is now set to `true` by default for all `align` presets, as well as all presets that
  inherit from it. This new default behavior applies unless it is directly overridden in the preset or
  with `--dont-split-by-sample` mix-in.
- Fixed possible crash with `--dry-run` option in `analyze`
- Fixed assembling feature for `irepertoire-human-rna-xcr-repseq-plus` preset. Now `{CDR2Begin:FR4End}`.
- `exportAlignments` function now reports UMI and/or Cell barcodes by default for presets with barcodes.
- `exportAlignments` by default now include the column `topChains`. `exportClones` function reports `topChains` for single cell presets.
- Changed tag pattern for `cellecta-human-rna-xcr-umi-drivermap-air`. Now UMI includes a part of the C-gene primer to increase diversity, and R2 is also used for payload.
- Fixed calculation of `geneFamilyName` for genes like `IGHA*00` (without number before `*` symbol)
- Added new constrain in low quality read mapping procedure preventing cross-cell read mapping
- Added split by C gene feature to `thermofisher-human-rna-igh-oncomine-lr` preset.
- Fixed usage of BAM input for `analyze`|`align` if file contains both paired and single reads

# Minor features

- Better formatting in `listPresets` command. Added grouping by vendor, labels and optional filtering
- Validation of input types in `align` or `analyze` by given tag pattern

# New Presets

- `bd-sc-xcr-rhapsody-full-length-enhanced-bead-v2` new preset for BD full-length protocol with enhanced beads V2
  featuring B384 whitelists.
- `takara-mouse-rna-tcr-umi-smarseq` preset for Takara Bio SMART-Seq Mouse TCR (with UMIs).
- Presets for new Cellecta kits: `cellecta-human-dna-xcr-umi-drivermap-air`, `cellecta-human-rna-xcr-full-length-umi-drivermap-air`, `cellecta-mouse-rna-xcr-umi-drivermap-air`.
- Added split by C gene for `cellecta-human-rna-xcr-umi-drivermap-air`.
- Presets for iRepertoire REpSeq+ kits with UMI: `irepertoire-mouse-rna-xcr-repseq-plus-umi-pe`, `irepertoire-human-rna-xcr-repseq-plus-umi-se`,`irepertoire-human-rna-xcr-repseq-plus-umi-pe`.
