# Presets Changes

- The `milab-human-rna-tcr-umi-race` preset has been updated. Now, clones are assembled by default based on the CDR3, in
  line with the manufacturer's recommended read length.
- The `flairr-seq-bcr` preset has been updated. Now, the preset sets species to `human` by default according to a
  built-in tag pattern with primer sequences.
- The following presets have been added to cover Ivivoscribe assay
  panels: `invivoscribe-human-dna-trg-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-trb-lymphotrack`, `invivoscribe-human-dna-igk-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-ighv-leader-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-igh-fr3-lymphotrack`, `invivoscribe-human-dna-igh-fr2-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-igh-fr1-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-igh-fr123-lymphotrack`.
- The following ppresets have been added for mouse Thermofisher
  assays: `thermofisher-mouse-rna-tcb-ampliseq-sr`,`thermofisher-mouse-dna-tcb-ampliseq-sr`,`thermofisher-mouse-rna-igh-ampliseq-sr`,`thermofisher-mouse-dna-igh-ampliseq-sr`.
- Preset for SMARTer Human scTCR a/b Profiling Kit: `takara-sc-human-rna-tcr-smarter`


## 🚀 New features

### Single Cell Somatic Hypermutation Trees

- Added step in `findShmTrees` to combine trees together using groups formed by `groupClones` command. In result
  topology in one node could be clones from different chains if they are connected by the same group. If there is no
  connection to any clone from different chain, there will be reconstructed version of clone from this chain. The step
  could be disabled by `--dont-combine-tree-by-cells` option
- Trees could be split or combined in step `Group trees by cells` of `findShmTrees`
- Added `exportShmSingleCellTrees` command that export one node per line. It there is several roots in a tree, data will
  be exported in different columns.
- Added `-subtreeId` to tree exports to differentiate part of trees from different chains
- `exportShmTreesWithNodes` and `exportShmTrees` commands will export subtrees with different chains at separate rows.

### Changes in `groupClones` command

- Previous algorithm replaced with a new one that have better way of working with contaminations, can detect
  multimappers (when one cell barcode marks two different cells) and can work with non-functional clones
- Part of clones now could be marked as contamination. That will be marked with a separate label in `exportClones`
  in `groupId` column. Such clones could be filtered out from export by `--filter-out-group-types contamination`
- More informative report in version of algorithm
- Fixed behaviour that clones with `undefiened` group were split by cell barcodes in a result file

### New characteristics in shm trees exports

- `-subtreeId` for determination of different chains in the same tree
- `-numberOfClonesInTree [forChain]` Number of uniq clones in the SHM tree.
- `-numberOfNodesWithClones` Number of nodes with clones, i.e. nodes with different clone sequences.
- `-totalReadsCountInTree [forChain]` Total sum of read counts of clones in the SHM tree.
- `-totalUniqueTagCountInTree (Molecule|Cell|Sample) [forChain]` Total count of unique tags in the SHM tree with
  specified type.
- `-chains` Chain type of the tree
- `-treeHeight` Height of the tree
- `-vGene`, `-jGene`, `-vFamily`, `-jFamily` - in previous version thous were exported only for nodes with clones
- `-vBestIdentityPercent`, `-jBestIdentityPercent`, `-isOOF` and `-isProductive` now exported for reconstructed nodes
  too

### New characteristics in clonotype export

- `-aaLength` and `-allAALength` is available alongside `-nLength` and `-allNLength`
- `-aaMutationsRate` is available alongside `-nMutationsRate`
- Added optional arg `germline` in `-nFeature`, `-aaFeature`, `-nLength`, `-aaLength`
  in `exportClones`, `exportAlignments` and `exportCloneGroups`. It allows to export a sequence of the germline instead
  of a sequence of the gene.
- For all mutation exports (excluding -mutationsDetailed) added optional filter by mutation
  type: `... [(substitutions|indels|inserts|deletions)]`
- Added `-nMutationsCount`, `-aaMutationsCount`, `-allNMutationsCount`, `-allAAMutationsCount` for all relatable exports
- For mutation exports in `exportShmTreesWithNodes` `(germline|mrca|parent)` option is now optional. Will be export
  mutations from `germline` by default
- Added `--export-clone-groups-sort-chains-by` mixin
- Nucleotide mutations now could be exported for features that contain `VCDR3Part`, `DCDR3Part` or `JCDR3Part`
- Fields that could be summarized as `-nLength`, `-nMutationsCount`, `-nMutationsRate` could be exported for several
  features, for example `-nMutationsRate VRegionTrimmed,JRegionTrimmed`
- Added `--export-clone-groups-sort-chains-by` mixin with type of sorting of clones for determination of the primary and
  the secondary chains. It applies to `exportCloneGroups` command. By default, it's `Auto` (by UMI if it's available, by
  Read otherwise), in previous version it was `Read`
- Added `--filter-out-group-types` mixin for filtering out clones with different results of `groupClones`
  command - `found`, `undefined` or `contamination`. It applies to `exportClones` command
- `exportCloneGroups` by default will export groups in separate files for `IG`, `TRAB`, `TRGD` and `mixed` files. This
  behaviour could be switched off by using `--reset-export-clone-table-splitting` or single
  `--export-clone-groups-for-cell-type`. In case of several `--export-clone-groups-for-cell-type` every cell type will
  be exported in separate file.
- In case of `--export-clone-groups-for-cell-type` in `exportCloneGroups` all mixed or unmatched groups will be filtered
  out.
- Added read and Molecule fraction columns to single cell exportClones output.


### Deprecations of export options

- `-lengthOf` now is deprecated, use `-nLength` instead
- `-allLengthOf` now is deprecated, use `-allNLength` instead
- `-mutationRate` now is deprecated, use `-nMutationsRate` instead

## Breaking compatibility

- Option `--build-from <path>` was removed from `findShmTrees` command

## 🛠️ Minor improvements & fixes

- More strict `Combining trees` step in `findShmTrees` command
- Better calculation of indel mutations between nodes in process of building shm trees
- Forbid export of germline sequence for VJJunction in shmTrees exports
- Fix validation of parameter in `-nMutationsRate`
- Fix `-nMutationsRate` if region is not covered for the clone
- Output of `exportAlignmentsPretty` in 4.5.0 it changed to verbose variant by default. Now we restore previous
  behaviour
- Fix IllegalArgumentException in `exportAlignmentsPretty` for cases where could not possible to translate nucleotide
  sequence to amino acids
- Fix error if `analyze` executed with `-f` and `--output-not-used-reads` in the same time
- Resolutions of wildcards are excluded from calculation of `-nMutationsRate` for CDR3 in `exportShmTreesWithNodes`
- Fix OutOfMemory exception in command `extend` with .vdjca input
- In `findShmTrees` filter for productive only clones now check for stop codons in all features, not only in CDR3
- Change default value for filter for productive clones in `findShmTrees` to false (was true before)
- Add option `--productive-only` to `findShmTrees`
- Fix parsing of `--export-clone-groups-for-cell-type` parameter
- Fix usage of `slice` command on clnx files that weren't ordered by id.
- In `slice` now default behaviour is to keep original ids. Previous behaviour can be called by `--reassign-ids`
- Fix parsing of composite gene features with offsets like `--assemble-clonotypes-by [VDJRegion,CBegin(0,10)]`
- Fix creating parent directory for output of `exportClonesOverlap`
- Fix `exportAirr` in case of a clone with CDR3 that don't have VCDR3Part and JCDR3Part
- Optimize calculation of ranks in clone set. It will speed up export with tags and several other places
- Added `clone_id` column in `exportAirr`
- Fixed `exportClones` in case of splitting file by `tag:...` if there is a clone that have several tags of requested
  level
- Added `tagType:...` label
- Fixed calculation of `-nMutationsCount`, `-nMutationsRate`, `-aaMutationsCount` and `-aaMutationsRate`. In some cases
  it
  was calculated on different region, not what was requested.
