## 🖇️ Combined Heavy+Light Somatic Hypermutation Trees from Single-Cell data

- A special step is added in `findShmTrees` to combine heavy and light SHM trees utilizing information added to clonotypes by `groupClones` command. Nodes in resulting tree will contain both light and heavy chains. If there is no connection to a clone from a companion chain, a reconstructed sequence will be added.
- Behaviour can be disabled with `--dont-combine-tree-by-cells` option to reconstruct separate heavy and light SHM trees
- Added `exportShmSingleCellTrees` command that export one node per line. It there is several roots in a tree, data will be exported in a different columns.
- Added `-subtreeId` to tree exports to differentiate part of trees from different chains
- `exportShmTreesWithNodes` and `exportShmTrees` commands will export subtrees with different chains at separate rows.

## 🚀 Other major upgrades

### Changes in `groupClones` command

- Previous algorithm replaced with a new one that have better way of working with contamination, can detect multi-mappers (when one cell barcode marks two different cells) and can work with non-functional clones
- Some clones are now explicitly marked as contamination. This information is available as a separate label in `exportClones` in `groupId` column. Such clones can be filtered out from export by `--filter-out-group-types contamination`
- More important algorithm performance metrics are added to the report
- Fix for behaviour leading to clones with `undefiened` group being split by cell barcodes

### New characteristics in SHM trees exports

- `-subtreeId` for determination of different chains in the same tree
- `-numberOfClonesInTree [forChain]` Number of uniq clones in the SHM tree.
- `-numberOfNodesWithClones` Number of nodes with clones, i.e. nodes with different clone sequences.
- `-totalReadsCountInTree [forChain]` Total sum of read counts of clones in the SHM tree.
- `-totalUniqueTagCountInTree (Molecule|Cell|Sample) [forChain]` Total count of unique tags in the SHM tree with specified type.
- `-chains` Chain type of the tree
- `-treeHeight` Height of the tree
- `-vGene`, `-jGene`, `-vFamily`, `-jFamily` - in previous version thous were exported only for nodes with clones
- `-vBestIdentityPercent`, `-jBestIdentityPercent`, `-isOOF` and `-isProductive` now exported for reconstructed nodes too

### New characteristics in clonotype export

- `-aaLength` and `-allAALength` is available alongside `-nLength` and `-allNLength`
- `-aaMutationsRate` is available alongside `-nMutationsRate`
- Added optional arg `germline` in `-nFeature`, `-aaFeature`, `-nLength`, `-aaLength` in `exportClones`, `exportAlignments` and `exportCloneGroups`. It allows to export a sequence of the germline instead of a sequence of the gene.
- For all mutation exports (excluding `-mutationsDetailed` ) added optional filter by mutation type: `... [(substitutions|indels|inserts|deletions)]`
- Added `-nMutationsCount`, `-aaMutationsCount`, `-allNMutationsCount`, `-allAAMutationsCount` for all relatable exports
- For mutation exports in `exportShmTreesWithNodes` `(germline|mrca|parent)` option is now optional. Will be export mutations from `germline` by default
- Added `--export-clone-groups-sort-chains-by` mixin
- Nucleotide mutations now could be exported for features that contain `VCDR3Part`, `DCDR3Part` or `JCDR3Part`
- Now `-nLength`, `-nMutationsCount`, `-nMutationsRate` can be calculated for multiple gene features (e.g. `-nMutationsRate VRegionTrimmed,JRegionTrimmed`)
- Added `--export-clone-groups-sort-chains-by` mixin with type of sorting of clones for determination of the primary and the secondary chains. It applies to `exportCloneGroups` command. By default, it's `Auto` (by UMI if it's available, by Read otherwise; previous default value was `Read`)
- Added `--filter-out-group-types` mixin to filter-out clones having certain clone group assignment kind: `found`, `undefined` or `contamination`. It applies to `exportClones` command
- Now `exportCloneGroups` by default will export groups in separate files for `IG`, `TRAB`, `TRGD` and `mixed`. This behaviour could be switched off by using `--reset-export-clone-table-splitting` or single `--export-clone-groups-for-cell-type`. In case of several `--export-clone-groups-for-cell-type` every cell type will be exported in separate file.
- In case of `--export-clone-groups-for-cell-type` in `exportCloneGroups` all mixed or unmatched groups will be filtered out.
- Added read and Molecule fraction columns to single cell exportClones output.

## 📚  Preset updates

- The `milab-human-rna-tcr-umi-race` preset has been updated: now clones are assembled by default based on the CDR3, in line with the manufacturer's recommended read length.
- The `flairr-seq-bcr` preset has been updated: now the preset sets species to `human` by default according to a built-in tag pattern with primer sequences.
- The following presets have been added to cover Ivivoscribe assay panels: `invivoscribe-human-dna-trg-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-trb-lymphotrack`, `invivoscribe-human-dna-igk-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-ighv-leader-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-igh-fr3-lymphotrack`, `invivoscribe-human-dna-igh-fr2-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-igh-fr1-lymphotrack`,`invivoscribe-human-dna-igh-fr123-lymphotrack`.
- The following presets have been added for mouse Thermofisher assays: `thermofisher-mouse-rna-tcb-ampliseq-sr`,`thermofisher-mouse-dna-tcb-ampliseq-sr`,`thermofisher-mouse-rna-igh-ampliseq-sr`,`thermofisher-mouse-dna-igh-ampliseq-sr`.
- Preset for SMARTer Human scTCR a/b Profiling Kit: `takara-sc-human-rna-tcr-smarter`
- The `milab-human-rna-ig-umi-multiplex` preset has been updated: the pattern now trims fewer nucleotides, which facilitates CDR1 identification. The splits by V and J genes have been removed as redundant due to the full-length assembling feature.

## 🛠️ Minor improvements & fixes

- More strict `Combining trees` step in `findShmTrees` command
- Better calculation of indel mutations between nodes in process of building shm trees
- Increased percent of successful alignment-aided overlaps by removing unnecessary overlap region quality sum threshold
- Impossible export of germline sequence for `VJJunction` in `shmTrees` exports now produces an error
- Parameter validation fix in `-nMutationsRate`
- Fix for `-nMutationsRate` if region is not covered for the clone
- Fix for the formal of `exportAlignmentsPretty` broken in the previous version
- Fix for IllegalArgumentException in `exportAlignmentsPretty` for cases where translation can't be performed
- Fix error for `analyze` executed with `-f` and `--output-not-used-reads` at the same time
- Resolutions of wildcards are excluded from calculation of `-nMutationsRate` for CDR3 in `exportShmTreesWithNodes`
- Fix OutOfMemory exception in command `extend` with `.vdjca` input
- In `findShmTrees` filter for productive only clones now check for stop codons in all features, not only in CDR3
- Change default value for filter for productive clones in `findShmTrees` to false (was true before)
- Add option `--productive-only` to `findShmTrees`
- Fixed parsing of `--export-clone-groups-for-cell-type` parameter
- Fixed usage of `slice` command on clnx files that weren't ordered by id.
- In `slice` now default behaviour is to keep original ids. Previous behaviour available with `--reassign-ids` option
- Fixed parsing of composite gene features with offsets like `--assemble-clonotypes-by [VDJRegion,CBegin(0,10)]`
- Fixed parent directory creation for output of `exportClonesOverlap`
- Fixed `exportAirr` in case of a clone with CDR3 that don't have VCDR3Part and JCDR3Part
- Optimize calculation of ranks in clone set. Speeds up export with tags and several other places.
- Added `clone_id` column in `exportAirr`
- Fixed `exportClones` in case of splitting file by `tag:...` if there is a clone that have several tags of requested level
- Fixed calculation of `-nMutationsCount`, `-nMutationsRate`, `-aaMutationsCount` and `-aaMutationsRate`. Previously in some cases it was calculated on different region, from what was requested.
- Added `CellBarcodesWithFoundGroups` for `groupClones` QC checks
- New filter `--no-feature` in `exportAlignmentsPretty`
- Fixed reporting in `align`, now coverage takes into account alignment-aided overlap

## ❗ Breaking changes

- Option `--build-from <path>` was removed from `findShmTrees` command

### Deprecations of export options

- `-lengthOf` now is deprecated, use `-nLength` instead
- `-allLengthOf` now is deprecated, use `-allNLength` instead
- `-mutationRate` now is deprecated, use `-nMutationsRate` instead
